how does speed test work ---

PING --- Packet Inter Network Groper
it is a small request sent over the network.

first a ping is sent to all the nearest isp test servers to measure the latency, and the one with lowest latency is then selected
for download and upload purposes. Eventually, the speeds are then measured.

Small data are first downloaded to measure the download speed for a fixed time. Later, the same data is uploaded to measure the upload speed.

How does vpn works?

without vpn --- you send a request to access a site. it is sent in the form of a packet to the router, further to your nearest isp server and finally to the site. once the packet is recieved by the site, and if the site is using https, then further data sharing is 
encrypted. ISP however, keep records of the sites you are visiting, and your exact location, ip address and stuffs.
ISP performs a process named DNS look up to route your request to appropriate web server.

with vpn --- from isp the packet is sent to vpn server and then things are same as above. vpn server however, doesn't store your much 
information. It hides your exact location from the site you visit. and also encrypts the data sent from your device, paid vpns do not 
store your informations too. Free vpns have comparatively very less servers hence very low speeds.

Although, paid vpns seem to give us complete anonymity over the internet, it is not so in reality. Browser fingerprinting is a way to track you down anyways.

http cookies (creates a sessionid) --- they are small data, stored by the site you visit on your local system, it can store credentials, cart items, or many other items on your local system. it has a unique sessionid by which it identifies you in your 
next visit. 

ssh protocol --- remotely access machines over the internet, to add data, delete data or transfer data from one machine to another.
                 runs on port 22.

                 It encrypts the data which is shared via network. and also uses public and private keys to get the prompt of the 
                 remote device. 
                 Such things are not included in telnet.